# How to work with users' passwords and how to securely hash passwords in PHP?

When you save users' passwords onto a database, you should NEVER store them in
plain-text due to security and privacy concerns. A database where users'
passwords are stored could be compromised at some point in the future, and by
hashing them, at the very least, it will be more difficult for an attacker to
determine the original passwords of the affected users.

```php
<?php

// Plain-text password example
$password = 'secretcode';
```

Cryptography is a large and very complex field for many people, so a good rule
of a thumb would be to leave it to the experts.

One of the once most used ways of hashing passwords, now considered extremely
unsafe, was to use the `md5()` function which calculates the md5 hash of a
string. Hashing passwords with md5 (or sha1, or even sha256) is not safe
anymore, because these hashes can be decrypted very quickly.

```php
<?php

// Plain-text password
$password = 'secretcode';

// Hashing the password with md5
$md5 = md5($password);
```

A common solution to preventing decryption is using a salt.

```php
<?php

// Plain-text password
$password = 'secretcode';

// Add a random number of random characters (the salt)
$salt = '3x%%$bf83#dls2qgdf';

// Hash salt and password together
$md5 = md5($salt.$password);
```

This is still not good enough though (rainbow tables).

## The right way to hash passwords in PHP

Currently, the right way to hash passwords is to use the latest PHP version and
its [native passwords hashing API](http://php.net/manual/en/book.password.php),
which provides an easy to use wrapper around the
[crypt](http://php.net/manual/en/function.crypt.php) function.

An example for using the native PHP password hashing API:

```php
<?php

// Plain-text password
$password = 'secretcode';

$options = ['cost' => 12];
echo password_hash($password, PASSWORD_DEFAULT, $options);
```

The `password_hash()` function currently provides three different algorithm
options. `PASSWORD_DEFAULT`, `PASSWORD_BCRYPT`, and (as of PHP >= 7.2.0)
`PASSWORD_ARGON2I`. Currently, the options `PASSWORD_DEFAULT` and
`PASSWORD_BCRYPT` will both result in the use of the BCRYPT hashing algorithm,
making them essentially the same. `PASSWORD_ARGON2I` will result in the use of
the Argon2 hashing algorithm. As cryptography and the PHP language as a whole
progress, there'll likely be other, new types of algorithms supported.
`PASSWORD_DEFAULT` will likely be changed in the future as recommendations for
the best hashing algorithm to use evolve and as new hashing algorithms become
available, and so, generally, `PASSWORD_DEFAULT` is the best option to choose
when hashing passwords.

The type of field used for storing passwords in databases should be
`varchar(255)` for future-proof algorithm changes.

Using your own salt is not recommended. It's generally recommended to use a
bullet-proof without setting your own salts, allowing the `password_hash()`
function handle this itself (salts are randomly generated by default when using
`password_hash()`).

Another important option to mention is the `cost`, which controls the hash
speed. On servers with better resources, `cost` can be increased. There's a
script for calculating the cost for your environment in the
[PHP manual](http://php.net/manual/en/function.password-hash.php#example-989).
It's good security practice is to try increasing this to a higher value than
the default (`10`).

Verifying passwords can be done with
[password_verify()](http://php.net/manual/en/function.password-verify.php):

```php
<?php

// This is the hash of the password in example above.
$hash = '$2y$12$VD3vCfuHcxU0zcgDvArQSOlQmPv3tXW0TWoteV4QvBYL66khev0oq';

if (password_verify('secretcode', $hash)) {
    echo 'Password is valid!';
} else {
    echo 'Invalid password.';
}
```

Another useful function is
[password_needs_rehash()](http://php.net/manual/en/function.password-needs-rehash.php),
which checks if the given hash matches the given options. This comes in handy
in the event of server hardware upgrades and when increasing the `cost` option
is possible.

The hash string returned by `password_hash()` consists of the following parts:

```
$2y$10$VCbjoi9DnyQyVxf4/RRoFeyOCeMPnCitAG07ZRpivwglmpbP0jOdW
 |  |  |                     |
 |  |  |                     |_ password (length depends on algorithm)
 |  |  |
 |  |  |_ salt (22 characters)
 |  |
 |  |_ cost (2 characters)
 |
 |_ algorithm (length depends on algorithm)
```

So, you can extract raw password hash components like this:

```php
$hash = '$2y$10$VCbjoi9DnyQyVxf4/RRoFeyOCeMPnCitAG07ZRpivwglmpbP0jOdW';
list(, $algo, $cost, $salt_and_password) = explode('$', $hash);
$salt     = substr($salt_and_password, 0, 22);
$password = substr($salt_and_password, 22);
```

Or simply use `password_get_info()` to get more readable information.

```php
$hash = '$2y$10$VCbjoi9DnyQyVxf4/RRoFeyOCeMPnCitAG07ZRpivwglmpbP0jOdW';
print_r(password_get_info($hash));
```

#### Output
```
Array
(
    [algo] => 1
    [algoName] => bcrypt
    [options] => Array
        (
            [cost] => 10
        )

)
```

## Password hashing in older PHP versions (PHP <= 5.5)

In case you're still using some older PHP version, there is a way to properly
secure passwords. Since PHP version > 5.3.7, you can use the PHP library
[password_compat](https://github.com/ircmaxell/password_compat). The PHP
library `password_compat` works in exactly the same way as the native PHP
password hashing API, so when you upgrade to the latest PHP version, you won't
need to refactor your code.

For PHP versions below 5.3.6, [phpass](http://www.openwall.com/phpass/) might
be a good solution, but try to avoid these and use the native password hashing
API instead.

## Password hashing in open source projects

Some of the most widely used PHP open source projects use different hashing
algorithms for passwords because they either support older PHP versions where
`password_hash()` wasn't available yet, or they already use the latest security
recommendations by PHP security experts:

Project | Password hashing
--- | ---
*CMS Airship* | Argon2i
*Drupal* | SHA512Crypt with multiple rounds
*Joomla* | bcrypt
*Laravel* | [bcrypt with other options](https://laravel.com/docs/5.3/hashing)
*Symfony* | [bcrypt with other options](http://symfony.com/doc/current/security.html)
*Wordpress* | salted MD5


## See also

* [PHP.net passwords FAQ](http://php.net/manual/en/faq.passwords.php)
* [csiphp.com](http://csiphp.com/blog/2012/02/16/encrypt-passwords-for-highest-level-of-security/) - Interesting blog post about encrypting passwords
* [password-validator](https://github.com/jeremykendall/password-validator) - PHP library that validates passwords against PHP's `password_hash` function using `PASSWORD_DEFAULT`. Will rehash when needed, and will upgrade legacy passwords with the Upgrade decorator.
* [securepasswords.info](http://securepasswords.info/about/) - A polyglot repo of examples for using secure passwords (typically bcrypt).
* [How to Safely Store Your Users' Passwords in 2016](https://paragonie.com/blog/2016/02/how-safely-store-password-in-2016)
